From hanselminutes.com. It's Hanselman. It's
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist and Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number three 42 recorded
live Thursday, October 18th, 2012. This episode
is brought to you by
tellering offering the best in
developer tools and support online@telerikdotcomandbyfranklins.net
training developers to work smarter
and now offering gesture pack
a powerful gesture, recording and
recognition system for Microsoft connect
for windows developers details at
dot com. In this
episode, Scott talks with Paul Lucas.
Paul was an electronics designer
for the space shuttle program
and author of the best
selling Apple writer. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes.
And today on the phone,
I've got Paul Lewis. He is
a computer programmer and a
former NASA designer, but his
career has expanded much beyond
NASA cause he retired at
about 35 and went on
to do all sorts of
other different, interesting things. Thank
you sir, for chatting with
me today. You're welcome. Glad
to be here. So let's,
if you don't mind, just
for people who may not
be familiar with your, your
work, let's talk a little
bit about what you did
kind of in the seventies
at NASA, and then we'll
kind of move. Okay. I
was hired by a subcontractor
of Rockwell international to design
part of the space shuttle.
My job was designed high
efficiency, electronic inverters that take
the shuttle basic power from
the fuel cells, the 28
volts fuel cells and convert
it into power are suitable
for running lamps. And so
my advert went into all
the lamps on the shuttle.
When you see a news
footage of the shuttle and
all the lights in the
crew quarters and on the,
on the flight deck, those
are all my lights that
run by my inverters. Wow.
So that was my, that
was my small contribution to
the subtle. And when someone
calls you and says, Hey,
we're going to go ahead
and do this space shuttle
thing. I mean, in, in
the seventies, you, you, you
know, you've gone to the
moon in recent memory, so
it's not complete science fiction,
but certainly the idea of
a reusable shuttle must've felt
a little bit science fictiony
It did it did. I
actually asked the program, went
along my involvement in the
program extended over about five
years as the program went
along, it became obvious that
it was going to be
a very, very complicated spacecraft,
more complicated than any other
has ever been. And I
don't think any of us
in the program had any
pre conviction of what was
going to take place during
the program, but it was
obviously complex at one point
at one point, Rockwell international
arrived and said, look, we
have a problem with the
fuel cells. We, you, 28
to 32 volts was to
limits the strip to stress
your inverters. We now realize
that it's kind of times
the voltage is going to
go up to 38 and
a half volts. What problem,
if any, and my managers
all intent on smoothing the
road, we're intent on saying,
Oh no, no problem. We
haven't had any problem with
that. And I argued and
argued. And finally I was
threatened to resign because I
knew that that the Apollo
disaster, which was fresh in
everybody's mind in those days,
resulted from people cutting corners.
And I was unwilling to
cut corners. So I had
quite a TIFF about that.
And I just said, look,
we can't, we can't allow
this. We, we have specifications.
And the, the foliage limits
are the things we've agreed
to. And suddenly they're asking
for a rather large increase
in, in the stress on
the components. And it just
isn't going to work. We
have to reevaluate the design.
So because I threatened to
resign it because I, I
pushed my resignation letter into
more hands than absolutely necessary.
They backed down and I
was able to get the,
the, the review done and
make the modifications that were
required to make it safe.
But after the challenger disaster,
and I think 86, what,
what came out of Morton?
Thiokol the, the subcontractor responsible
for the solid rocket boosters
sounded very familiar to me
because they also had exactly
the same thing. Some engineer
who knew the system intimately
well was objecting and saying
you can't launch under those
conditions. And his managers overruled
him and said, no, no,
we can't say that to
NASA. We've got to tell
them it's all right. And
the next morning the shovel
blew up. So I didn't
feel so overcautious when that
happened. No, though. When, when
you are a effectively, a
chicken little, I mean, chicken
little at the time, perhaps
whistleblower after the fact in
retrospect, but there must be
people blowing whistles and declaring
that the sky is falling
all the time. You know,
the system more than ever,
right? Yes. It happens all
the time. How does the
manager know that this is
a problem or this isn't
a problem? They ultimately either
trust you at the time.
Oh, that's your question. Yeah.
Well, that's a good, that's
a very good question. In
this case, I think the,
the managers didn't think very
hard about it and they
were, they tended to rely
on their own past experiences
with simpler projects. And they
just said, does this look
like a big deal? To
me, it's just a, whatever,
six extra, extra volts. What
they didn't realize was the
stress on electronic components and
a running electronic circuit is
the square of the voltage
change. And so it was
a much larger difference than
they were realizing, and that
was beyond their expertise. So
I, you know, I just
think they figured that would
go along. Even though I
had objective, they thought they
could talk me down. And
that's the one, that's one
of the funny things about
a position like that. I
was younger than my managers.
They all had more experience
in the field, but none
of them had worked on
a spacecraft, a complex spacecraft
before. And none of them
had worked with a specifications
that were so rigorous and
specific as on the subtle.
So I think they were,
I think they were inclined
to just tell me that
I didn't know what I
was talking about, but as
it turns out, I was
able to put a component
on a test rig and,
and make a, make a
deliberate installation errors such as
might happen on the production
line and blow it up
by putting 38 volts on
it. It's exploded. And at
that point, I think at
that point, I think they
began to realize that I
wasn't just being a nervous
Nellie or whatever the expression
is. That's it Fairly explicit
way of making your point?
Yeah. I just said, come
here guys. And I hooked
this component up deliberately backwards
to make my point. And
it turned out later that
in fact, a wiring person
did hook one of these
components up backwards and it
exploded. Wow. That pretty much
did the get the job
When you're making a specifications
like this, presumably you're thinking,
well, this is going to
go to space. And the
specifications, you know, are all
assumptions. I mean, you can,
you can specify things like
voltage, but then there are
also environmental things that you,
you, you think you're specifying,
but then, you know, who
knows what's going to happen
Actually, actually specifications for spacecraft
don't allow any leeway for
the, for the person reading
them. They don't say, we
think this might happen. Or
we think that might happen.
They just say the components,
shell survived, the following temperature
range and the following pressure
range. And this component needs
to be cooled in zero
gravity, which is not so
easy. Things like that. So
it, it spells it out.
It doesn't leave anything to
the imagination. And so a
person can just go, we
met every specification and actually
that's probably what NASA prefers.
They don't like the, you
know, we think this will
work kind of a response.
So there really is no
room for error in these
situations. Oh no, no. It's
very specific. A NASA specification
for a spacecraft on man
spacecraft is more exquisite and
specific than any, any legal
document you can imagine reading.
It just says exactly the
temperature, humidity, vibration, everything else,
voltage range, all those things
are spelled out explicitly, which
is why by the way,
Rockwell and what came forward.
As soon as they realized
that because of a bus
switching procedure error, the, the
voltage on the bus might
go up to 38 and
a half volts. They instantly
told everybody within 24 hours,
once they realized that they,
they got to that stage
of the design and they
said, whoops, what happens if
this switch has turned this
way? And that switch has
turned that way, the a,
the fuel cell is completely
unloaded and they hadn't considered
that possibility. And the volt
is left up to 38
and a half volts. And
they, and they instantly informed
you of everybody by memo
within 24 hours, which NASA
required them to do. Of
course, wow. I'm looking at,
I've looked at some of
the documents that you can
get. You can go up
to nasa.gov and there's a
technical reports server. And I've
spent some time looking over
some of your documents from
1977 through 1981, they're all
available as PDFs, or you
can order them. And the
language is extremely dense. There
is no, there is no
room at all for, for
error in, in, in the
language. It's almost like a
legal document. I mean, worked
on banking systems, but I've
never seen anything quite this,
you know, dance is the
only word that I have
for it as far as
information dense. Yeah. When, when
I reported on my work
in articles, technical articles, I
was already pre predisposed to
writing it in a way
that's be no possibility for
ambiguity, but then it went
through several review cycles with
people, both in NASA and
in my own company to
make sure there wasn't anything
left to chance. And so
what you see there in
those documents is the result
of several editorial passes after
my own writing. And I
tend to be the kind
of person who writes in
an explicit way without, without
ambiguity, but that natural tendency
was amplified by the people
who reviewed it afterward. Wow.
And then afterwards, I am
told that you created a
mathematical model of the solar
system that ended up being
used. Yes, I, I, in
the early seventies, the first
programmable calculators arrived, and this
was, this was well before
personal computers were available, but
I was really curious about
programming and, and solving mathematical
problems. So as soon as
one was available, I bought
one that was an HP
65, I believe was the
first one or the
one of the two. And
I have great fun with
it. And pretty quickly I
had written a solar system
model using a pretty simple
methods for all nine planets.
And I published it in
a magazine and the people
at JPL, all of whom
had the same programmable calculator
wanted it, so they could
use it in their daily
work because they otherwise had
to submit a batch job
to a huge mainframe, to
get a prediction about a
trivial positions of the planets
kind of problem. So I
got, I got in touch
with them and they asked
for some changes and they
pointed out an error I
had made in the position
of Pluto. So I got
a amount of correspondence. So
that's the basis of that
is the people at JPL
were using my program on
their, on the same programmable
calculator I was using to
create the program. What made
you kind of drop out
is not meant in any
way of a pejorative term,
but what made you stop
kind of working so intensely
and then instead kind of
moving to a more remote
location and kind of focusing
on This is going to
sound, this is going to
sound a bit hokey, but
I was deprived of a
childhood. And so once I
had enough money to retire,
I, I did. So just
to be able to go
do something besides work for
a living, I had never
actually done the sort of
thing that children do when
they're children. That part of
my life, that part of
my life was, was never
existed. It never happened. So
I had a much narrower
and more conservative idea of,
of having enough money for
retirement. In the early seventies,
I got enough money together
to buy a small, silly
piece of land in Oregon
and, and still have $3,000
left over. So I set
up time to retire. So
I, so I had gotten
done with my work for
NASA. The project was completed
and that the people I
worked with obviously wanted me
to stay on and work
on a lot more things,
because I was pretty good
at what I did, but
I explained what I just
said. And I guess they
realized that we agreed, but
they kept me on as
a consultant for a couple
of years afterwards. So every,
every couple of months I
would go down for a
week and, and solve some
engineering problems for them. And
then go back and I
had a vegetable garden and
they had little wood, heated
cabin and things like that.
It was great fun. And
so I did my back
to the woods face in
the middle of the seventies
when apparently everyone else was
doing it. And then, and
then the fun part, I
was sitting in my little
cabin by 12 by 16
foot cabin with a book
copy of scientific American with
a kerosene lantern. And there
was an advertisement for the
Apple two. It was 1977.
It was an advertisement for
the Apple two. And I
said, Oh my God, this
is better than even a
programmable calculator. So I ordered
one with, with actually with
two thirds of the money
I had left. I ordered
an Apple to thinking how
much fun it would be
to play with. I wasn't
thinking about anything else beyond
that, just to have a,
to have a computer of
my own was just mind
boggling to me at the
time. And then about a
year later, two years later,
a magazine asked me to
write an article about Einstein's
theory of relativity for the
Centennial 1979 offense of Einstein
birth. So I started writing
the article and it was
a bit more complicated than
the articles I'd written for
them in the past. There
was a, there's a bunch
of different bits and pieces
to  activity. It's not
so easy to write about
for a popular audience. And
so I had pretty soon,
I had pieces of paper
all over the room with
little bits and chunks of
ideas that I wanted to
get into the article, but
in exactly the right order,
the thing about special relativity
is you can't skip over
anything and you don't want
to put something complicated in
too early. If it isn't
tied in with what's around
it, if it was a
perfect place for some kind
of a textual organizer. So
then I thought, okay, I
have an Apple two, and
I've been programming, various silly
programs with it. Maybe I'll
write a program to organize
all these bits and pieces
of notes, and I can
move them around on the
screen and just add things
and remove things. So what,
so in parallel, I started
writing a word processing program
and the article for the
magazine. So I was the
customer of my program and
I was using the program
half the time and writing
the program half the time.
And I call it Lexa
calc, which is a program
named that hasn't been used
yet, probably because I told
people they couldn't do it.
But anyway, I called it
Lexus. Can I envision that
it would be popular like
VisiCalc? And it would be
four words. What VisiCalc was
for numbers anyway, Apple heard
about it and they buy.
Then they realized that they
couldn't sell any more Apple
tools unless they had some
programs readily available for people
who weren't themselves programmers, in
other words, and, and end
users of personal computers. So
they were more than excited
about having more applications available.
So they heard about my
program. They asked to see
it. So I rode my
bike down to the mailbox
with a big Manila envelope
thinking to myself, Hey, maybe
they'll like my program. Maybe
I'll make a hundred dollars.
And in the next five
years, it became a best
seller. It was available worldwide
and it was called Apple
writer. And that's, I retired.
One of the reasons I
retired is I really made
a lot of money on
that program. And I retired
again. I retired from, I
guess one could say that
I retired from my retirement.
Hey, this is Scott and
I am really excited about
these guys. This is a
special offer from our friends
at DN simple, true story.
Carl reached out to DN,
simple to ask them if
they wanted to advertise with
Hansel minutes, because we liked
them that much. I was
a kind of a funny
thing. They didn't come to
us. We went to them
because we think DNSimple is
great. It's a hosted dentist
service that you use to
manage your domain names. Prices
started about $3 a month
for up to 10 managed
domains. You can also use
DN simple to register a
domain names, purchase SSL certificates.
All of my domains have
been moved off of GoDaddy
and are now at DN
simple. I like it because
there's an application on my
iPhone. I can manage my
DMS from there. There's an
API that you can use.
The best part actually is
these one-click services. So you
can register a domain, get
it up and running in
a couple of minutes and
then go in and apply
services to it. So you
can say this domain is
for Google apps and this
domain is forget. Hub pages
in this domain is preposterous,
and they know the DNS
records and set them up
for you. Even for something
as complicated as Google apps,
there's like 11 different settings.
You need to create, they
handle it all for you.
So here's the deal. They've
got a special 30 day
trial. You can cancel at
any time, but Hansel minutes
listeners get three months of
free DNS service. So you
got a DN, simple.com/h M
special deal for Hansel minutes,
listeners just visit Deon simple.com/h
M Hanselman. His listeners get
three months of free DNS
service love these guys. They're
so nice. DNSimple hosted DNS.
Check them out where you,
what you clever enough or
prescient enough to keep them
from giving you a hundred
dollars. Oh yeah, no, no,
actually it's the things worked
my way. I, I think
nature favored me in spite
of my, my silliness, the
original version of Apple writer.
I, I sold to Apple
outright for $7,500, but the
problem was they had no
programmers at Apple to improve
it. And people wanted improvements
right away. They wanted a
wider, a wider display, more
characters, upper and lowercase, all
kinds of things like that.
And especially as the Apple
to hardware evolved and made
it possible to display upper
and lower case characters and
80 columns wide, all those
sorts of things. And so
finally, after a while, they
just gave up and they
said, you know, do you
have a new version of
your program? I said, yeah,
but one it's a completely
different version. It has nothing
to do with the previous
one, which was true. And
two, I'm not selling it
to we'll do a royalty
arrangement. And they, and they,
by then they had anticipated
that that would be the
case because of how badly
the first one went. They
took my program, the one
I sold to them for
$7,500 and stripped out my
name and copyright notice and
sold it as an Apple
product and asked them how
they thought they could do
that. And they said, well,
you didn't tell us we
couldn't. So anyway, so, so
I was, I got a
chance to, to have a
preview of what could go
wrong, where the stakes weren't
very high in the late
seventies before the main stream
event took place. So I
was able to benefit from
my past mistakes in a
way that nothing, no great
loss was incurred. So the
new program, which I had
totally rewritten it and made
it much more efficient. And
I insisted on a number
of things. One, it was
royalties on me. I wasn't
selling them the program and
two, they couldn't take out
my name. So the only
reason I'm a household or
was a household name in
the personal computer world in
the mid eighties, mid eighties,
for example, was because of
that. I told them they
couldn't take my name out
of the program. Well, anyway,
so I said, so they
said, okay, royalties, that's fine
with us. That means no
upfront money. How do you
rate? And I said, Oh,
I don't know, 25%. How's
that sound to you guys?
And they said, sure, no
problem. 25% sounds reasonable. These
are of us realized that
royalty rates on software are
almost never that high. And
the result was that, that
they sold quite a lot
of copies of the program,
but the volume of software
in those days was a
tiny fraction of what it
is, for example, with Microsoft
now, but not withstanding that
it was quite a, quite
a lucrative arrangement. And then
as, as the sales started
going up in a hockey
stick fashion, they said, you
know, this 25% thing, that
wasn't such a great idea.
And I said, well, yeah,
maybe not, but I don't
think that we should change
it at this point. So
they argued about it a
little bit, but I was
unwilling to give way there
was no incentive for me
to change it. And I
don't think, I think they
finally realized that, you know,
the program was selling itself.
They didn't need to try
very hard to get people
to buy it. And how
long did that last For
about from around 1980 or
81 until about 85. And
it was in the millions,
I'll just say it was
in the millions of dollars
in royalties. You know, these
things go up in a
hockey stick fashion. I know
I wrote a, I wrote
an application for the original
Palm pilot and it went,
it went up in a
hockey stick fashion, and we
made all sorts of money
and then it just disappeared.
It just disappeared. What was
happening was what was happening
in the, in the early
to mid eighties was that
people were buying more Apple
twos because there was a
program or there was VisiCalc
and Apple writer were the
two bestselling programs at the
time. And people had dawned
on people that a, there
was software available. So they
weren't buying a hobbyist machine
anymore. And B a personal
computer made sense, which, which
in those days, you know,
people were becoming aware of
the fact that there was
a new consumer product called
the personal computer. And that
was fact number one is
second. Number two was how
many of them were there?
This is, this was when
IBM was selling their personal
computer as an entry system
for their main line business.
The, the IBM people in
those days never really appreciated
the, that there was a
market for personal computers, they
of it as a way
to get people, to buy
larger machines, just as a
sort of an introductory thing.
And they actually called it
the entry system. That's that
was their name for it.
Internal TBM. Oh, I have
a nice, I have a
story about IBM at the
height of an Apple, right.
Popularity. IBM called me up
and they say, we'd like
something like Apple writer for
the IBM PC. I said,
okay, what business terms? And
there was a long pause
there. They were accustomed to
talking to programmers who weren't
their own managers. And so
I think they were shocked
by the fact that I
instantly switched over to the
business mode. Anyway. They said,
well, we have this worked
out. We'll give you a
hundred thousand in royalties after
which we own the program.
And I said, a hundred
thousand in royalties, let's see
that's 10 days of royalties
on Apple or right now,
which was true. And they,
there was a long pause
on the phone line. That's
six. They realized at that
point they were going to
get anywhere. They, then they
then called John Draper, AKA
captain crunch, and offered him
the same deal. And he
took it. And it wasn't
a very good program. I
forget the name of it,
but it wasn't very good.
And when somebody asked him
about it later, allegedly John
Draper replied, they asked for
a hundred thousand dollar program.
I gave them one. Now
I can't, I can't verify
that quote, but I've, I've
heard it from several different
sources. So You turn it
into free where then after
1992, after, you know, it
was discontinued, As soon as
the program became popular and
successful, it occurred to me
that it was going to
be too pricey. It was
$125, which in those days
was a lot of money
for a program. I decided
to create a version that
was missing a few features
that I could give away
in schools. And so I
did that. I wrote called
it free rider and Apple
agreed. I showed them the
program and it wasn't able
to print. It was just
a, it was able to
create data files and, you
know, it was limited. So
let's say I wouldn't be
upset. And I was able
to offer it. And for
awhile, there was a program
called free rider floating around
and everybody knew it was
mine. And then somebody took
it over and added a
print feature to it and
called it Fred writer and
charged people $10 for it.
So that was my first
exposure to what happens when
you offer free software, somebody
will take it over and
offer it for sale. And
since then, I have to
tell you that because I
have so many free programs
on my website, that I'm
constantly having to get, to
try to keep people from
selling my free programs or
pockets with them together on
a DVD and offering them
for sale and things like
that. It's just exceedingly annoying.
And one of the reasons
is people who are young
enough and inexperienced enough, don't
realize that if something is
free, it doesn't mean you're
free. It's all right for
you to sell it. That
doesn't necessarily follow. And I
think a person who's young
enough who doesn't know enough
about law might think that
because something is free, then
it's all right to sell
it. And I've had any
number of conversations with young
programmers who didn't understand that,
that doesn't follow When you
were a young program when
you were getting started in
the business and not necessarily
a young programmer in the,
in the age sense, but
in the, you know, you're
getting into personal, you've created
Apple rider, you're having some
success. Are you hanging out
virtually or otherwise with, you
know, the Dan Britt kins
or the, you know, Charles
Simoni, are you, is this
a club of people? Because
my entire programming career took
place from rural Oregon and
elsewhere in the woods. I
hardly ever met people like
that. And I would get
an invitation to go to
the hackers conference every year.
And I would just forget
it. I wouldn't do it.
So I never actually met
any of those people. I
met a lot of people
at Apple, of course, directly
people who worked for Apple
and people who showed up,
but I didn't actually meet
most of the people who
were in the mainstream. I
would exchange letters from time
to time and then maybe
a TV interview, that sort
of thing. But I didn't
have that as a peer
group. Not really, and not,
not because people didn't ask
me to, but I just
wasn't interested. I didn't want
to abandon, regarded that I
had the perfect world. I
was living in the woods
and it was quiet and
I'm pretty, and I could
write programs and it just,
you know, I didn't want
to go to the city
when I did go to
the city, I have to
mention this in passing. I
was unwilling to make any
compromises and the distance between
where, where Apple was located
in Cupertino and the San
Jose municipal airport was maybe,
well, I don't, I don't
remember maybe 10 miles, 12
miles. And so I would,
I would do is I
ride my bike to the
airport where I had my
airplane. This was when I
had royalty money. Right. And
I put my bicycle in
the airplane and fly down
to San Jose land. The
airplane takes the bicycle out
of the airplane and ride
my bike to Cupertino and
people who show me on
me showing up. They didn't
quite, you know, we thought
you lived in Oregon. Well,
yeah, I do. And I
just rode my bike down.
You rode your bike all
the way down just to,
I didn't necessarily, I didn't
necessarily mislead them to that
extent, but I think it
took them a while to
realize that I was, I
was mixing bicycles on airplanes.
What do you, what do
you feel about building software
as a single individual where,
you know, you've built Apple
rider and you've built a
rack Ophelia and you've, you've
built stuff where you understand
it from the beginning to
the end versus working on
something larger than anyone human
could possibly understand, like a
subsystem within this space. I'm
not sure my opinion on
that subject is worth very
much since I've never done
the ladder that you just
described, But you built a
subsystem and PI's part of
a larger system that then
became part of a space
shuttle. Yeah. But that was
electronics is there Is that
much of a difference is
not creation of a system,
a creation of a system.
It's very different. If you
write a piece of software
as a team with other
software developers, you have to
be very careful about naming
conventions and, and interfacing and
all that sort of thing.
If you write a piece
of it, if you create
a piece of a spacecraft,
all you need to be
aware of is where it
mounts physically and what the
voltage is that is going
to be driven by. So
it's much, much simpler. Now.
That's not, that's obviously not
true for all spacecraft work.
If I had been responsible
for part of the avionics
or something like that, that
would have been different. But
I had the irony was
that my inverters appeared all
over the space shuttle, 20
or 30 of them altogether
in the, in the cargo
Bay and the crew quarters
on the flight deck. But
they were all pretty much
alike. And they were individually
quite simple because they, all
they had to do was
be hooked up to 28
volts and they provided light.
So, so it was much
simpler, you know, by the
way, once I realized how
simple the outcome was, the
desired function was, I made
the design as simple as
humanly possible. I had a
very simple design, which I
did deliberately. A lot of
people in the field of
electronics would like to have
a design complex enough that
it ends up being an
advertisement for their, for their
ingenuity. I didn't feel that
way about it at all.
I only want it to
do what was not catch
fire and kill last minutes.
That's all I cared about.
So I deliberately chose the
simplest possible design. And when
people read the documents who
were referring to earlier online,
they can see that it's
extremely simple. I did all
I could to eliminate parts
and limit the parts count
so that there would be
fewer modes of failure. So
I think actually a large
software project with multiple programmers
is way more complicated. And
in fact, it's qualitatively so
different than it's, I'm sorry,
it's quantitatively so different than
it's ends up being qualitatively
different. So I've never, so
even in hardware design, I've
never had a big teamwork
component where I had to
name things in certain ways
and learn how to communicate
in certain ways. And certainly
in the world of software,
I'm really an activism, a
throwback. I, I've never worked
on a software project with
even one other person in
my entire career. Wow. Have
you taken your love of
simplicity or you're striving for
simplicity and applied it to
the software that you did
and do continue to create?
Oh yes. And I also
release most of my source
code. I'm like most of
my projects, my source code
is released. So people can
look for themselves and see
that, that I named things
in certain ways to make
it easy, to sort things
out. So, yes, I, I
try to avoid complexity there
also. And as I got
older, the reason it becomes
more obvious. I don't want
it to not be able
to understand my own projects
after five years after the
fact, that's a big danger
as you get older. And
even at the peak of
one's career, if one writes
a complex piece of software
with the intent of blowing
the minds of people around
them, the risk is that
after 90 days they won't
understand their own code. I
try to avoid that one.
So you release things for
free and you put them
out there, but you do
still rent, maintain copyright. You've
you've put out software you've
put out. Yeah, no, I'm
sure. You know, I'm sure,
you know, the reason why,
if I release a program
that don't have a copyright
on it, people will take
it and incorporate it into
their own projects and offer
it for sale. In fact,
I have to tell you
that a number of occasions
where I have released under
the GPL, people have taken
the code and just stripped
out the GPL notice and
used it in their project
because of that mentality. I
actually don't think most of
the people who do that
have criminal intent, they're just
too young and inexperienced to
understand that the fact that
something is free doesn't mean
that they can sell it
to take it over and
sell it. It doesn't mean
that What makes you want
to put things out for
free? I mean, you, you
put out a book when
you did your around the
world solos. Now we're switching
over to the truly philosophical.
Well, since our, since I
retired at the age of
35, I always wanted to
retire as young as possible.
We'd go play because I
never got to play when
I was a kid. And
I always thought that was
a, a catalog, a lack
in my background, but what
didn't occur to me that
if I succeeded in retiring,
that I had faced a
problem that I certainly hadn't
anticipated, which was that I
needed to feel as though
I was accomplishing something that
I had constructive work. So
I'm really a workaholic and
I could never actually be
retired in the sense of
going fishing though. I always
have to have some sort
of project. So since, since
that I've useful to other
people, and I just said
this to my neighbor the
other day about something unrelated,
I really have to feel
useful to other people. That's
a, that's a core value
of mine. And so if
I write a program, I'm
always thinking, Oh, well, let's
see, is this going to
be something that people will
find useful? And I just
did an SQL, a tutorial
with that in mind, just
to make sure that, that
I hardly ever write programs
for my own use. And
if I do write a
program, that's really only for
me. I hardly, I don't
necessarily even release it. But
if I do release a
program, it's it's with the
knowledge that somebody will find
it useful. Dosing is something
that drives you. I mean,
you, you, you're not, you
don't necessarily want to get
paid. Like you said, you
put out your book and
it's, it remains free, but,
but you produced and you
put it out there and
hopefully it helps. Yeah. People
find it useful. People will
find that what I do
useful, obviously, if you work
for a living, if you
worked for a living and
made a salary, but you
knew that what you did
was completely useless to anyone
else. It would probably destroy
it for you. I would
certainly destroy it for me.
I don't know about other
people. So if you do
something for free, I think
the same rules apply. If
you do something gratis, if
you intend to put it
out there and offer it
for free, you still want
it to be useful to
people. Otherwise you wouldn't necessarily
do it. Let me ask
you this in closing, what
is, what is the thing
that you were the most
proud of? What accomplishment are
you the most proud of
free or otherwise? Oh, okay.
Here's my answer. When I
lived in Oregon and I
was getting royalties for Apple
rider, I became aware of
the fact that I'm not
going to say which town
in Oregon, there was a
15% pregnancy rate. It's a
local high school. And so
I single-handedly started a planned
Parenthood clinic in that town
against, I guess, fierce, local
opposition with my own funds.
And there were death threats
and there were fire bombings
of doctor's offices and all
kinds of things. It was
the single thing in my
entire career that I was
most proud of because it
actually made a difference. Young
women were able to complete
their educations. Certain number of
lives weren't destroyed and naturally
enough as being, because I'm
a lifelong rebel. The fact
that everybody was angry about
it and couldn't understand why
I was doing it. That
helped also. That's great. Well,
I really appreciate you sharing
your stories with us and
people can go up on
your website@arachnoid.com. They can download
your book confessions of a
long distance sailor. They can
even purchase that on Amazon
or on Lulu, and they
can also check out your
applications both past and present
up on your website. Thank
you so much for chatting
with me today, sir. You're
welcome. Glad to be here.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week.